<!-- Pagina 1 -->

A Unified Framework for Stealthy Adversarial Generation via Latent Optimization and Transferability Enhancement

Gaozheng Pei
peigaozheng23@mails.ucas.ac.cn
EECE, UCAS
Beijing, China

Ke Ma*
make@ucas.ac.cn
EECE, UCAS
Beijing, China

Dongpeng Zhang
zhangdongpeng24@mails.ucas.ac.cn
EECE, UCAS
Beijing, China

Chengzhi Sun
sunchengzhi24@mails.ucas.ac.cn
EECE, UCAS
Beijing, China

Qianqian Xu
xuqianqian@ict.ac.cn
IIP, ICT, CAS
Beijing, China

Qingming Huang*
qmhuang@ucas.ac.cn
SCST, UCAS
IIP, ICT, CAS
BDKM, CAS
Beijing, China

ABSTRACT
Due to their powerful image generation capabilities, diffusion-based adversarial example generation methods through image editing are rapidly gaining popularity. However, due to reliance on the discriminative capability of the diffusion model, these diffusion-based methods often struggle to generalize beyond conventional image classification tasks, such as in Deepfake detection. Moreover, traditional strategies for enhancing adversarial example transferability are challenging to adapt to these methods. To address these challenges, we propose a unified framework that seamlessly incorporates traditional transferability enhancement strategies into diffusion model-based adversarial example generation via image editing, enabling their application across a wider range of downstream tasks. Our method won first place in the "1st Adversarial Attacks on Deepfake Detectors: A Challenge in the Era of AI-Generated Media" competition at ACM MM25, which validates the effectiveness of our approach.

CCS CONCEPTS
• Computing methodologies → Computer vision problems.

KEYWORDS
Diffusion Model; Adversarial Examples; Deepfake Detection

ACM Reference Format:
Gaozheng Pei, Ke Ma, Dongpeng Zhang, Chengzhi Sun, Qianqian Xu, and Qingming Huang. 2025. A Unified Framework for Stealthy Adversarial Generation via Latent Optimization and Transferability Enhancement. In Proceedings of the 33rd ACM International Conference on Multimedia (MM ’25), October 27–October 31, 2025, Dublin, Ireland. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 5 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXX

1 INTRODUCTION
Deep neural networks (DNNs), despite their superior performance across diverse tasks [22, 26, 32, 41], remain highly vulnerable to adversarial examples—inputs crafted by adding imperceptibly small perturbations that can cause models to make erroneous predictions [1, 4, 11, 20, 30]. Crucially, these adversarial perturbations frequently exhibit transferability: examples designed to mislead one model can often deceive other, potentially unknown models. This property, known as adversarial transferability [7, 25, 33, 35, 40], significantly heightens practical security concerns for deployed machine learning systems. It enables practical black-box attacks [21, 24], where an attacker can compromise models without access to their internal parameters or architectures. Therefore, advancing the understanding of how to generate highly transferable adversarial examples is fundamental to developing more robust DNNs.

Traditional methods for enhancing the transferability of adversarial examples typically operate in the pixel space, and these approaches can be broadly categorized into five types. Gradient-based methods (e.g., MI-FGSM [8], VMI-FGSM [31], NEF [27]) optimize perturbations through momentum and variance tuning, while input transformation techniques (e.g., DIM [35], SIM [16], TIM [9]) apply stochastic augmentations to improve generalization. Advanced objective-based attacks [15, 38] exploit intermediate-layer features, neuron importance, or feature-space discrepancies to craft perturbations. Model-Specific attacks [34, 40] leverage architectural characteristics of surrogate models to amplify gradient propagation or selectively mask model parameters. Ensemble-based attacks [17, 36] aggregate gradients or predictions from multiple surrogate models, which reduce bias toward any single model. However, the adversarial samples generated by the aforementioned methods exhibit limited stealthiness, making them perceptible to human observers.

Diffusion models [10, 12, 28], owing to their powerful image generation capabilities, have been widely applied to numerous downstream tasks. Recent works have leveraged diffusion-based image editing techniques to construct adversarial examples [2, 5, 14, 37, 39], thereby enhancing their stealthiness. However, these methods’

*Corresponding authors.*

---

<!-- Pagina 2 -->

frameworks are inherently incompatible with traditional adversarial transferability enhancement strategies and struggle to generalize beyond traditional classification tasks, significantly limiting their practical attack effectiveness in real-world scenarios. To address these limitations, we propose a universal framework that is not only compatible with conventional adversarial transferability enhancement strategies but also applicable to arbitrary classification tasks. Specifically, to ensure that the edited image is as similar as possible to the original image, we first use DDIM inversion [23] to obtain the latent variables. We select the latent at a certain timestep as the update target while freezing the latents of previous timesteps, using the image description provided by the vision-language model as textual guidance during the image restoration process. When optimizing the selected latent, suitable adversarial transferability approaches can be randomly assembled from pools of traditional methods. Overall, our framework offers two key advantages:

- **Universal Compatibility** It seamlessly integrates traditional and enhanced adversarial transferability methods.
- **Broad Applicability** Our framework generalizes to all kinds of downstream classification tasks.

## 2 RELATED WORK

### 2.1 Traditional Methods

**Gradient Optimization-based Attacks** These methods [8, 27, 31] improve adversarial transferability by optimizing gradient computation through techniques that stabilize update directions and mitigate local optima convergence.

**Input Transformation-based Attacks** This category [9, 16, 35] improves transferability by diversifying input patterns via stochastic transformations, making adversarial examples less dependent on specific model architectures.

**Advanced Objective-based Attacks** These approaches [15, 38] exploit intermediate-layer features, neuron importance, or feature-space discrepancies to craft perturbations that are more transferable across models.

**Model-specific Attacks** These methods [34, 40] leverage the architectural characteristics of surrogate models to amplify gradient propagation or selectively mask model parameters.

**Ensemble-based Attacks** By aggregating gradients or predictions from multiple surrogate models, ensemble methods [17, 36] reduce bias toward any single model.

### 2.2 Diffusion-based Methods

While traditional methods have demonstrated significant improvements in enhancing the transferability of adversarial examples, their dependence on pixel-level modifications results in generated samples with limited stealthiness, rendering them perceptible to human observers. [2] proposes DiffAttack, the first method to leverage diffusion models for adversarial attacks by crafting perturbations in the latent space rather than pixel space, achieving both superior imperceptibility and enhanced transferability across black-box models. AdvDiff [5] introduces a novel approach to generating unrestricted adversarial examples by leveraging diffusion models’ reverse generation process, proposing two interpretable adversarial guidance techniques that inject target-class gradients while preserving generation quality. Diff-PGD [37] introduces a diffusion-guided adversarial attack framework that leverages SDEdit purification during gradient optimization, enabling the generation of adversarial samples that maintain natural image distributions while achieving high attack success rates. StealthDiffusion [39] introduces a latent-space adversarial optimization framework that combines Latent Adversarial Optimization (LAO) with a Control-VAE module to preserve image consistency.

## 3 PRELIMINARY

Since we aim to accurately reconstruct a given real image, we employ the deterministic DDIM sampling [29]:

$$z_{t-1} = \sqrt{\frac{\alpha_{t-1}}{\alpha_t}} z_t + \left( \sqrt{\frac{1}{\alpha_{t-1}}} - 1 \right) \cdot \epsilon_\theta(z_t, t, C).$$

Diffusion models often operate in the image pixel space where $z_0$ is a sample of a real image. In our case, we use the popular and publicly available stable diffusion model [28] where the diffusion forward process is applied on a latent image encoding $z_0 = E(x_0)$ and an image decoder is employed at the end of the diffusion backward process $x_0 = D(z_0)$.

**Classifier-free guidance.** One of the key challenges in text-guided generation is the amplification of the effect induced by the conditioned text. To this end, [13] have presented the classifier-free guidance technique, where the prediction is also performed unconditionally, which is then extrapolated with the conditioned prediction. More formally, let $\varnothing = \psi(\text{"")}$ be the embedding of a null text and let $w$ be the guidance scale parameter, then the classifier-free guidance prediction is defined by:

$$\tilde{\epsilon}_\theta(z_t, t, C, \varnothing) = w \cdot \epsilon_\theta(z_t, t, C) + (1 - w) \cdot \epsilon_\theta(z_t, t, \varnothing).$$

**DDIM inversion.** A simple inversion technique was suggested for the DDIM sampling [6, 29], based on the assumption that the ODE process can be reversed in the limit of small steps:

$$z_{t+1} = \sqrt{\frac{\alpha_{t+1}}{\alpha_t}} z_t + \left( \sqrt{\frac{1}{\alpha_{t+1}}} - 1 \right) \cdot \epsilon_\theta(z_t, t, C).$$

In other words, the diffusion process is performed in the reverse direction, that is $z_0 \rightarrow z_T$ instead of $z_T \rightarrow z_0$, where $z_0$ is set to be the encoding of the given real image.

## 4 METHODOLOGY

### 4.1 Problem Formulation

The objective of adversarial attacks against deepfake detectors is to craft adversarial perturbations that modify deepfake images—making them undetectable as synthetic content by state-of-the-art detectors—while maintaining high perceptual similarity to the original images. Given deepfake images $x$, we hope that we can craft adversarial perturbation $\delta$ to produce adversarial examples $x_{\text{adv}} = x + \delta$ such that the deepfake detector $f$ misclassifies $x_{\text{adv}}$ as real label and the perturbation $\delta$ is imperceptible, maintaining high visual similarity between $x_{\text{adv}}$ and the original $x$. This problem can be formulated as follows:

$$\min \quad SSIM(x_{\text{adv}}, x)$$

$$s.t. \quad f(x_{\text{adv}}) = y_{\text{real}}.$$

---

<!-- Pagina 3 -->

4.2 Our Framework

We display in the Figure 1 the whole framework of our method, where we adopt the open-source stable diffusion [28] that pre-trained on extremely massive text-image pairs. Since adversarial attacks aim to fool the target model by perturbing the initial image, they can be approximated as a special kind of real image editing [3]. Inspired by recent diffusion editing approaches, our framework leverages the DDIM Inversion technology [23], where the clean image is mapped back into the diffusion latent space by reversing the deterministic sampling process:

$$z_t = \text{Inverse}(z_{t-1}) = \underbrace{\text{Inverse} \circ \cdots \circ \text{Inverse}}_{t},$$

$$z_0 = \text{VAE} - \text{Encoder}(x_0),$$

where Inverse($\cdot$) denotes the DDIM Inversion operation. We apply the inversion for several timesteps from $x_0$ (the initial image) to $x_t$. A high-quality reconstruction of $x_0$ can then be expected if we conduct the deterministic denoising process from $x_t$. Different from existing image editing approaches proposed to modify text embeddings for image editing, we choose to directly modify the latent at smaller timesteps, which achieves image editing while preserving the original semantic information of the image as much as possible. We here directly perturb the latent as follows:

$$\arg \min_{z_t} \mathcal{L}_{\text{attack}} := J(x_{\text{adv}}, y_{\text{true}}, f).$$

We can get $x_{\text{adv}}$ as follows:

$$x_{\text{adv}} = \text{VAE} - \text{Decoder}(z_0') = \underbrace{\text{Denoise} \circ \cdots \circ \text{Denoise}}_{t}(z_t, C),$$

where $J(\cdot)$ is the cross-entropy loss and Denoise($\cdot$) denotes the diffusion denoising process. In addition to classification loss, other losses $\mathcal{L}_{\text{others}}$ can also be enhanced to maintain image consistency (e.g., L1 loss) or to improve the transferability of adversarial examples. The final loss can be formulated as follows:

$$\mathcal{L} = \mathcal{L}_{\text{attack}} + \lambda \mathcal{L}_{\text{others}}.$$

To further enhance image consistency, we incorporate text guidance by utilizing a pre-trained vision-language model to describe the image content. The prompt "Describe this image" is used, and the resulting textual description serves as text guidance during the reverse process.

The complete algorithm flow can be referred to in 1. As we can see, by decoupling the inverse image restoration process from adversarial attacks to the greatest extent, this allows our framework is compatible with almost all traditional strategies for enhancing adversarial example transferability, while not relying on the diffusion model’s own discriminative capability for images. This makes it applicable to arbitrary downstream classification tasks.

5 EXPERIMENTS

5.1 Experimental Setting

Dataset The AADD-2025 Challenge provides a comprehensive dataset designed to evaluate the robustness of deepfake detection systems against adversarial attacks. The entire dataset is divided into sixteen subsets, categorized along two axes: generation method (GAN-based or diffusion-based) and image resolution (high quality or low quality). Each category contains four distinct image generators. All images in the dataset are synthetic, generated by state-of-the-art GAN and diffusion models, and exhibit a broad range of visual styles and qualities. This diversity ensures a challenging environment for both detection and adversarial attack tasks.

Evaluation Metric To quantitatively assess the effectiveness and imperceptibility of adversarial perturbations, the evaluation metric

---

<!-- Pagina 4 -->

Algorithm 1 Our Framework

Input: Synthetic face $x$, Real face label $y_{true}$, Perturbation radius $\epsilon$, Classifier $[f_1, f_2, ..., f_N]$, Step size $\alpha$, Qwen $Q$.

Output: Adversarial face $x_{adv}$, Iterations $T$.

1. Text embedding $C = \psi(Q(x, "Describe this image"))$.
2. $z_t^0 = \text{DDIM-Inversion}(x)$ via eq (5).
3. Random initialization perturbation $\delta$.
4. for $i = 0$ to $T$ do
5. Get clean image $x_{adv}^i$ via eq (7).
6. //Transform-based attack
7. Image augmentation $x_{aug}^i = \mathcal{T}(x_{adv}^i)$.
8. //Advanced loss function and model-related attack
9. Calculate loss $loss_n = \mathcal{L}(f_n, x_{aug}, y_{true})$ via eq (8).
10. //Ensemble-based attack
11. Ensemble loss $loss = \text{Ensemble}(loss_1, loss_2, ..., loss_N)$.
12. //Gradient-based attack
13. Update $\delta^{(i+1)} = \delta^i - \alpha \times \frac{\partial loss}{\partial \delta^i}$.
14. Update $\delta^{(i+1)} = \text{Proj}(\delta^{(i+1)}, -\epsilon, \epsilon)$.
15. Update $z_t^{i+1} = z_t + \delta^{(i+1)}$.
16. end for

jointly considers two components: structural similarity and attack success rate. Specifically, each adversarial image is required to preserve high visual similarity to its original counterpart, measured by the Structural Similarity Index (SSIM), while simultaneously being misclassified as “real” by multiple deepfake detection systems. Let $I_k$ denote the $k$-th image in the deepfake test dataset, and $I_k^{ADV}$ its corresponding adversarial version. Let $C = \{C_1, C_2, ..., C_m\}$ represent the set of classifiers. The final score is defined as:

$$\sum_{C_f \in C} \sum_{k=1}^{N} SSIM(I_k, I_k^{ADV}) \cdot \left[ C_f(I_k^{ADV}) = \text{LABEL}_{real} \right],$$

where:

- $N$ is the total number of test images.
- $SSIM(I_k, I_k^{ADV})$ measures the perceptual similarity between the original and adversarial images.
- $C_f(I_k^{ADV})$ is the prediction of classifier on adversarial image.
- $LABEL_{real}$ denotes the ground truth label for real images.
- $[\cdot]$ is the indicator function, which returns 1 if the condition is true, and 0 otherwise.

A high final score indicates that the adversarial image successfully bypasses the detection system while remaining visually close to the original, thereby reflecting both attack success and imperceptibility.

Implementation details To minimize content distortion when the attack succeeds, we adopt an attack strategy with a gradually increasing perturbation radius. The initial attack radius is set to 0.05, the final radius to 0.3, and the step size between iterations to 0.02. For the transform-based attack, we selected the following data augmentations from the third-party library Kornia: RandomVerticalFlip, RandomHorizontalFlip, CenterCrop, RandomRotation90, RandomChannelDropout. For ensemble-based attack, we combined the classification losses from different white-box classifiers by summing them with equal weights. For the advanced loss function, we additionally incorporated an L1 loss as a constraint to preserve image content consistency. We used MI-FGSM as our gradient-based attack. For the guidance scale parameter, we set $w = 1$ as suggested by [23] for better editability and reconstruction. We set DDIM sampling steps is 20 and we optimized the latent representations for either the 1st or 2nd timestep.

5.2 Experimental Result

Table 1: Comparison of transfer attack success rate and SSIM between our method and the traditional method.

| Method | Resnet50->DenseNet121 | Radius | ASR (↑) | SSIM (↑) |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Traditional | 4/255 | 5.23 | 0.8627 | |
| Traditional | 8/255 | 15.35 | 0.7876 | |
| Traditional | 16/255 | 43.38 | 0.6032 | |
| Ours | - | 100 | 0.7814 | |

Table 2: Comparison of final scores among the top 5 teams.

| Team name | Ours | Safe AI | RoMa | GRADIANT | DASH |
| :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- | :--- |
| Final score (↑) | 2740 | 2709 | 2679 | 2631 | 2618 |

We first conducted a comparative analysis using two key metrics: SSIM and transfer success rate. As demonstrated in Table 1, our method achieves a near-perfect transfer success rate of 100%, while maintaining SSIM values comparable to traditional methods with a perturbation radius of 8/255. Notably, we observe that traditional methods fail to achieve successful transfer on certain samples even without attack radius constraints, which further validates the superiority of our method. Visualization of attack effects (Figure 2) reveals that the perturbations generated by our method are primarily concentrated on foreground subjects while leaving background areas virtually unaffected, demonstrating the superior stealth characteristics of our adversarial examples. The comprehensive evaluation in Table 2 shows that our method achieved the highest final score among all 13 competing teams. These experimental results collectively confirm the effectiveness and robustness of our proposed approach.

---

<!-- Pagina 5 -->

REFERENCES

[1] Nicholas Carlini and David Wagner. 2017. Towards evaluating the robustness of neural networks. In 2017 IEEE Symposium on Security and Privacy (SP). 39–57.

[2] Jianqi Chen, Hao Chen, Keyan Chen, Yilan Zhang, Zhengxia Zou, and Zhenwei Shi. 2024. Diffusion models for imperceptible and transferable adversarial attack. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence 47, 2 (2024), 961–977.

[3] Guillaume Couairon, Jakob Verbeek, Holger Schwenk, and Matthieu Cord. 2023. DiffEdit: Diffusion-based semantic image editing with mask guidance. In International Conference on Learning Representations.

[4] Francesco Croce and Matthias Hein. 2020. Reliable evaluation of adversarial robustness with an ensemble of diverse parameter-free attacks. In International Conference on Machine Learning. 2206–2216.

[5] Xuelong Dai, Kaisheng Liang, and Bin Xiao. 2024. Advdiff: Generating unrestricted adversarial examples using diffusion models. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision. 93–109.

[6] Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. 2021. Diffusion models beat gans on image synthesis. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (2021), 8780–8794.

[7] Yinpeng Dong, Fangzhou Liao, Tianyu Pang, Hang Su, Jun Zhu, Xiaolin Hu, and Jianguo Li. 2018. Boosting adversarial attacks with momentum. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 9185–9193.

[8] Yinpeng Dong, Fangzhou Liao, Tianyu Pang, Hang Su, Jun Zhu, Xiaolin Hu, and Jianguo Li. 2018. Boosting adversarial attacks with momentum. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 9185–9193.

[9] Yinpeng Dong, Tianyu Pang, Hang Su, and Jun Zhu. 2019. Evading defenses to transferable adversarial examples by translation-invariant attacks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 4312–4321.

[10] Patrick Esser, Sumith Kulal, Andreas Blattmann, Rahim Entezari, Jonas Müller, Harry Sainyi, Yam Levi, Dominik Lorenz, Axel Sauer, Frederic Boesel, et al. 2024. Scaling rectified flow transformers for high-resolution image synthesis. In International Conference on Machine Learning. 12606–12633.

[11] Ian Goodfellow, Jonathon Shilens, and Christian Szegedy. 2015. Explaining and Harnessing Adversarial Examples. In International Conference on Learning Representations.

[12] Jonathan Ho, Ajay Jain, and Pieter Abbeel. 2020. Denoising diffusion probabilistic models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 33 (2020), 6840–6851.

[13] Jonathan Ho and Tim Salimans. [n. d.] Classifier-Free Diffusion Guidance. In NeurIPS 2021 Workshop on Deep Generative Models and Downstream Applications.

[14] Jin Li, Ziqiang He, Anwei Luo, Jian-Fang Wu, Z Jane Wang, and Xiangui Kang. 2024. AdvAD: Exploring Non-Parametric Diffusion for Imperceptible Adversarial Attacks. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 37 (2024), 52323–52353.

[15] Qizhang Li, Yiwen Guo, Wangmeng Zuo, and Hao Chen. 2023. Improving adversarial transferability via intermediate-level perturbation decay. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 36 (2023), 32900–32912.

[16] Jiaodong Lin, Chuanbiao Song, Kun He, Liwei Wang, and John E Hopcroft. 2020. Nesterov Accelerated Gradient and Scale Invariance for Adversarial Attacks. In International Conference on Learning Representations.

[17] Yanpei Liu, Xinyun Chen, Chang Liu, and Dawn Song. 2017. Delving into Transferable Adversarial Examples and Black-box Attacks. In International Conference on Learning Representations.

[18] Yang Liu, Qianqian Xu, Peisong Wen, Siran Dai, and Qingming Huang. 2024. Not All Pairs are Equal: Hierarchical Learning for Average-Precision-Oriented Video Retrieval. In Proceedings of the ACM International Conference on Multimedia. 3828–3837.

[19] Yang Liu, Qianqian Xu, Peisong Wen, Siran Dai, and Qingming Huang. 2025. When the Future Becomes the Past: Taming Temporal Correspondence for Self-supervised Video Representation Learning. arXiv:2503.15096.

[20] Aleksander Madry, Aleksandar Makelov, Ludwig Schmidt, Dimitris Tsipras, and Adrian Vladu. 2018. Towards Deep Learning Models Resistant to Adversarial Attacks. In International Conference on Learning Representations.

[21] Thibault Maho, Teddy Furon, and Erwan Le Merrer. 2021. Surfree: a fast surrogate-free black-box attack. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. 10430–10439.

[22] Yujian Mo, Yan Wu, Xinneng Yang, Feilin Liu, and Yujun Liao. 2022